

    AIRES distribution src directory CONTENTS.txt file.

The src directory is the upper level directory containing all the sources
of the AIRES programs and libraries.

The directories within src are:

    src/aires            Main programs and subroutines that make the main body
                         of AIRES.

    src/cinterface       Routines for the AIRES library C language interface.

    src/igrf             Routines from the GEOMAG package to calculate
                         the geomagnetic field accordingly with the
                         IGRF (International Geomagnetic Reference
                         Field) model, plus the AIRES-GEOMAG interface.

    src/netlib_minpack   Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm for nonlinear fitting
                         (Public domain software which is part of the
                         NETLIB library).

    src/qgsjet           QGSJET package for hadronic collision processing,
                         plus AIRES-QGSJET interface.

    src/sibyll           SIBYLL package for hadronic collision processing,
                         plus AIRES-SIBYLL interface.

    src/unixdep          AIRES auxiliary routines that are operating system
                         dependent, in their UNIX version.

    src/util             Some auxiliary utility programs.

    src/extensions*      AIRES auxiliary routines that contain
                         instructions not belonging to the standard
                         FORTRAN77. There are several directories of
                         this kind, each one corresponding to
                         different FORTRAN dialects.
 
    src/sysdep*          AIRES auxiliary routines that are operating system
                         and platform dependent. There are several directories
                         of this kind, each one corresponding to a different
                         platform.

There are no customizable files here. It may eventually be necessary
to create additional "unixdep", extensions*, or "sysdep*" kind
directories (containing the corresponding sources) to solve
portability problems when installing AIRES in a new system, different
from the ones that can be selected in the configuration file. If it is
your case, take into account before going on that this is an "advanced
user" task, which generally requires a good knowledge of the system
and the system routines.

